---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2016-04: Potential remote code execution in zend-mail via Sendmail adapter"
date: 2016-12-20
---

# ZF2016-04: Potential remote code execution in zend-mail via Sendmail adapter

When using the [zend-mail](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-mail) component
to send email via the `Zend\Mail\Transport\Sendmail` transport, a malicious user
may be able to inject arbitrary parameters to the system sendmail program.
The attack is performed by providing additional quote characters within an
address; when unsanitized, they can be interpreted as additional command line
arguments, leading to the vulnerability.

The following example demonstrates injecting additional parameters to the
sendmail binary via the `From` address:

```php
use Zend\Mail;

$mail = new Mail\Message();
$mail->setBody('This is the text of the email.');

// inject additional parameters to sendmail command line
$mail->setFrom('"AAA\" params injection"@domain', 'Sender\'s name');

$mail->addTo('hacker@localhost', 'Name of recipient');
$mail->setSubject('TestSubject');

$transport = new Mail\Transport\Sendmail();
$transport->send($mail);
```

The attack works because zend-mail filters the email addresses using
the [RFC 3696](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3696#section-3) specification,
where the string `"AAA\" params injection"@domain` is considered a valid
address. This validation is provided using the zend-validator component with
the following parameters:

```php
Zend\Validator\EmailAddress(
    Zend\Validator\Hostname::ALLOW_DNS | Zend\Validator\Hostname::ALLOW_LOCAL
)
```

The above accepts local domain with any string specified by double quotes as the
local part. While this is valid per RFC 3696, due to the fact that sender email
addresses are provided to the sendmail binary via the command line, they create
the vulnerability described above.

## Action Taken

To fix the issue, we added a transport-specific email filter for the `From`
header in the `Sendmail` transport adapter. The filter checks for the sequence
`\"` in the local part of the email `From` address.

```php
$from = $headers->get('From');
if ($from) {
    foreach ($from->getAddressList() as $address) {
        if (preg_match('/\\\"/', $address->getEmail())) {
            throw new Exception\RuntimeException("Potential code injection in From header");
        }
    }
}
```

The patch resolving the vulnerability is available in:

- zend-mail, starting in version 2.7.2
- zend-mail, 2.4.11
- Zend Framework, 2.4.11

Zend Framework 2.5 and 3.0 versions will receive the update automatically, as
executing `composer update` in projects using these versions will update to
zend-mail
2.7.2+.

### Acknowledgments

The Zend Framework team thanks the following for identifying the issues and
working with us to help protect its users:

- The independent security researcher [Dawid Golunski](https://legalhackers.com/),
  who reported the vulnerability to Beyond Security’s SecuriTeam Secure
  Disclosure program;
- [Enrico Zimuel](http://www.zimuel.it), who provided the patch.
