---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2012-04: Potential Proxy Injection Vulnerabilities in Multiple Zend Framework 2 Components"
date: 2012-11-29
---

# ZF2012-04: Potential Proxy Injection Vulnerabilities in Multiple Zend Framework 2 Components

`Zend\Session\Validator\RemoteAddr` and `Zend\View\Helper\ServerUrl` were found
to be improperly parsing HTTP headers for proxy information, which could
potentially allow an attacker to spoof a proxied IP or host name.

In `Zend\Session\Validator\RemoteAddr`, if the client is behind a proxy server,
the detection of the proxy URL was incorrect, and could lead to invalid results
on subsequent lookups.

In `Zend\View\Helper\ServerUrl`, if the server lives behind a proxy, the helper
would always generate a URL based on the proxy host, regardless of whether or
not this was desired; additionally, it did not take into account the proxy port
or protocol, if provided.

## Action Taken

A new class, `Zend\Http\PhpEnvironment\RemoteAddress`, was developed to provide
reusable code surrounding the detection of a client IP via proxy headers, and
`Zend\Session\Validator\RemoteAddr` was refactored to consume this class. This
code:

- no longer searches against the non-standard `Client-Ip` header.
- allows specifying the specific header to check against for proxy detection.
- allows specifying a list of trusted proxy servers against which to mask any
  detected proxy IPs.
- properly selects the right-most IP address from the list of proxy IPs.

The `ServerUrl` view helper was modified as follows:

- a flag was introduced to enable/disable proxy detection.
- proxy detection is disabled by default.
- in addition to using the `X-Forwarded-Host` header, support for detecting the
  proxy port (via the `X-Forwarded-Port` header) and proxy protocol (via the
  `X-Forwarded-Proto` header) was added.  This patch has been applied starting
  in versions 2.0.5 of Zend Framework, as well as to the 2.1 development branch.

## Recommendations

If you are using any of the components listed, we recommend upgrading to 2.0.5
or greater.

## Other Information

### Acknowledgments

The Zend Framework team thanks the following for identifying the issues and
working with us to help protect its users:

- Fabien Potencier
