---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2012-03: Potential XSS Vectors in Multiple Zend Framework 2 Components"
date: 2012-09-20
---

# ZF2012-03: Potential XSS Vectors in Multiple Zend Framework 2 Components

`Zend\Debug`, `Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub`, `Zend\Log\Formatter\Xml`,
`Zend\Tag\Cloud\Decorator`, `Zend\Uri`, `Zend\View\Helper\HeadStyle`,
`Zend\View\Helper\Navigation\Sitemap`, and
`Zend\View\Helper\Placeholder\Container\AbstractStandalone` were not using
`Zend\Escaper` when escaping HTML, HTML attributes, and/or URLs. While most were
performing some escaping, because they were not using context-appropriate
escaping mechanisms, they could potentially be exploited to perform Cross Site
Scripting (XSS) attacks.

## Action Taken

Each component and/or class was evaluated to determine which context-appropriate
escaping mechanism should be used, and the appropriate method from
`Zend\Escaper\Escaper` was then used. In most cases, this also involved
composing the Escaper class as an injectible dependency.

In the case of `Zend\Tag\Cloud\Decorator`, the `HtmlCloud` and `HtmlTag`
decorators were found to lack validation of user-provided HTML element and
attribute names. Logic was added to validate these and raise an exception if
invalid.

This patch has been applied starting in versions 2.0.1 of Zend Framework, as
well as to the 2.1 development branch.

## Recommendations

If you are using any of the components listed, we recommend upgrading to 2.0.1
or greater.

## Other Information

### Acknowledgments

The Zend Framework team thanks the following for working with us to help protect
its users:

- Robert Basic
