---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2015-07: Filesystem Permissions Issues in Multiple Components"
date: 2015-09-15
---

ZF2015-07: Filesystem Permissions Issues in Multiple Components
---------------------------------------------------------------

 [ As reported by the Doctrine Project](http://www.doctrine-project.org/2015/08/31/security_misconfiguration_vulnerability_in_various_doctrine_projects.html), incorrect permissions masks when creating a new directory or file can lead to:

- Local arbitrary code execution
- Privilege escalation

 Such attacks typically require direct access to a user of the system to exploit, but are dangerous vectors when available.

 During an audit of the Zend Framework code base, we found several instances where we were using incorrect permissions masks that could lead to such vulnerabilities.

### Action Taken

 We identified the following projects/components with vulnerabilities by checking for `mkdir()` and `umask()` calls:

- Zend Framework 2's `zend-cache` component, specifically the Filesystem storage adapter and CaptureCache pattern.
- The admin-facing code for [zf-apigility-doctrine](https://github.com/zfcampus/zf-apigility-doctrine)
- Zend Framework 1's `Zend_Cloud` Filesystem storage adapter, `Zend_Search_Lucene`'s filesystem storage, and `Zend_Service_WindowsAzure`'s package scaffolder.

 We updated the code as follows:

- Default privileges for creating directories were set to `0775`, and files to `0664`.
- If code allows specifying the permissions mask, we mask it using `& ~0002`. This means that if you absolutely must allow world-executable privileges, you **must** extend the class. This leaves the framework secure by default, and is an effort to prevent developers from shooting themselves in the foot.

 The following components/libraries were patched, at the version specified:

- Zend Framework 1, version 1.12.16
- Zend Framework 2, versions 2.4.8
- zf-apigility-doctrine, version 1.0.3
- zend-cache, versions 2.4.8 and 2.5.3

 This vulnerability was originally disclosed via the Doctrine project as [CVE-2015-5723](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2015-5723).

### Recommendations

 If you use any of the components listed above, we recommend upgrading to one of these versions immediately.

### Acknowledgments

 The Zend Framework team thanks the following for identifying the issues and working with us to help protect its users:

- [Marco Pivetta](https://github.com/Ocramius) for notifying us of the Doctrine project's vulnerability, suggesting we audit similarly, and reviewing the patch;
- [Matthew Weier O'Phinney](https://mwop.net/) for developing the patch.