---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2012-01: Local file disclosure via XXE injection in Zend_XmlRpc"
date: 2012-06-22
---

# ZF2012-01: Local file disclosure via XXE injection in Zend\_XmlRpc

`Zend_XmlRpc` is vulnerable to XML eXternal Entity (XXE) Injection attacks. The
`SimpleXMLElement` class (SimpleXML PHP extension) is used in an insecure way to
parse XML data. External entities can be specified by adding a specific DOCTYPE
element to XML-RPC requests. By exploiting this vulnerability an application may
be coerced to open arbitrary files and/or TCP connections.

## Action Taken

The `Request` and `Response` implementations in `Zend_XmlRpc` were patched to
ensure `libxml_disable_entity_loader()` is invoked prior to instantiating any
`SimpleXML` objects. This disables XXE parsing, and thus disables the attack
vector.

This patch has been applied starting in versions 1.11.12 and 1.12.0 of Zend
Framework, and has been ported to the upcoming version 2.0.0 development branch
(and will be included starting with the 2.0.0beta5 release).

## Recommendations

If you are using either `Zend_XmlRpc_Server` or `Zend_XmlRpc_Client` in your
projects, we recommend **immediately** upgrading to 1.11.12 or greater.

## Update

Additional attack vectors were identified in `Zend_Dom`, `Zend_Feed`, and
`Zend_Soap`, and patched in an identical manner.

The patches for these components are included in versions 1.11.13 and 1.12.0 of
Zend Framework, and ported to the upcoming version 2.0.0 development branch
(released with 2.0.0rc4). If you are using any of the affected components, we
recommend upgrading to 1.11.13 or greater immediately.

## Other Information

### Acknowledgments

The Zend Framework team thanks the following for working with us to help protect
its users:

- Johannes Greil
- Kestutis Gudinavicius

Both from SEC Consult Vulnerability Lab ([www.sec-consult.com](http://www.sec-consult.com)).

- Pádraic Brady, for identifying the additional vectors in `Zend_Dom`,
  `Zend_Feed`, and `Zend_Soap`
