---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2011-01: Potential XSS in Development Environment Error View Script"
date: 2011-03-03
---

# ZF2011-01: Potential XSS in Development Environment Error View Script

## Executive Summary

The default error handling view script generated using `Zend_Tool` failed to
escape request parameters when run in the "development" configuration
environment, providing a potential XSS attack vector.

## Action Taken

`Zend_Tool_Project_Context_Zf_ViewScriptFile` was patched such that the view
script template now calls the `escape()` method on dumped request variables.

## Recommendations

This particular vulnerability affects only those users who (a) are using
`Zend_Tool` (aka the `zf` CLI) to generate their `ErrorController` and view
script, and (b) are running that code under the "development" configuration
environment on a public-facing web server.

If you are running in any environment other than "development", the issue will not present.

There are three approaches you can take:

Make sure you set the correct application environment.  You should only ever run
in the "development" environment when developing the application, and typically
only behind a firewall. Additionally, you should set your `APPLICATION_ENV`
environment variable via your web server's virtual host configuration whenever
possible. For public-facing hosts, set the value to anything other than
"development".

If you _must_ run under the "development" application environment on a
publically accessible server, follow one of the next two recommendations.

### Upgrade to Zend Framework 1.11.4

Zend Framework 1.11.4 includes a patch that adds escaping to the generated
`error/error.phtml` view script, ensuring that request variables are escaped
appropriately for the browser.

Do note, however, that this will not update any previously generated code. You
will still need to follow the next advice for previously generated error view
scripts.

### Modify your error/error.phtml view script

If you cannot upgrade, or if you want to patch previously generated error view
scripts, do the following:

- Open the `application/views/scripts/error/error.phtml`
  file from your ZF-generated project in a text editor or your IDE.

- Find the heading "Request Parameters".

- In the line following, you'll see the following statement: 

  ```php
  <?php echo var_export($this->request->getParams(), true) ?>
  ```

- Edit the above statement to wrap the `var_export` call within a
  `$this->escape()` method call: 

  ```php
  <?php echo $this->escape(var_export($this->request->getParams(), true)) ?>
  ```

- Once complete, save the file.

## Other Information

### Acknowledgments

The Zend Framework team thanks the following for working with us to help protect
its users:

- Robert Lehmann
- Frederik Braun
- Hubert Hesse
