---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2013-02: Potential Information Disclosure and Insufficient Entropy vulnerabilities in Zend\\Math\\Rand and Zend\\Validate\\Csrf Components"
date: 2013-03-14
---

# ZF2013-02: Potential Information Disclosure and Insufficient Entropy vulnerabilities in Zend\\Math\\Rand and Zend\\Validate\\Csrf Components

In Zend Framework 2, the `Zend\Math\Rand` component generates random bytes using
the OpenSSL or Mcrypt extensions when available but will otherwise use PHP's
`mt_rand()` function as a fallback. All outputs from `mt_rand()` are predictable
for the same PHP process if an attacker can brute force the seed used by the
Marsenne-Twister algorithm in a Seed Recovery Attack. This attack can be
successfully applied with minimum effort if the attacker has access to either a
random number from `mt_rand()` or a Session ID generated without using
additional entropy. This makes `mt_rand()` unsuitable for generating non-trivial
random bytes since it has Insufficient Entropy to protect against brute force
attacks on the seed.

The `Zend\Validate\Csrf` component generates CSRF tokens by SHA1 hashing a salt,
random number possibly generated using `mt_rand()` and a form name. Where the
salt is known, an attacker can brute force the SHA1 hash with minimum effort to
discover the random number when `mt_rand()` is utilised as a fallback to the
OpenSSL and Mcrypt extensions. This constitutes an Information Disclosure where
the recovered random number may itself be brute forced to recover the seed value
and predict the output of other `mt_rand()` calls for the same PHP process. This
may potentially lead to vulnerabilities in areas of an application where
`mt_rand()` calls exist beyond the scope of Zend Framework.

## Action Taken

Zend Framework have revised the `Zend\Math\Rand` component to replace the
current `mt_rand()` fallback for OpenSSL/Mcrypt with Anthony Ferrara's
[RandomLib](https://github.com/ircmaxell/RandomLib), incorporating an additional
entropy source based on [source code published by George Argyros](https://github.com/GeorgeArgyros/Secure-random-bytes-in-PHP).
The new fallback collects entropy from numerous sources other than PHP's
internal seed mechanism and extracts random bytes from the resulting mixed
entropy pool.

## Recommendations

If you are using either `Zend\Math\Rand` or `Zend\Validate\Csrf`, do not have
either the OpenSSL or Mcrypt extensions installed in PHP, _and_ are on a
non-Unix-like system, we recommend upgrading immediately to version 2.0.8 or
2.1.4.

## Other Information

### Acknowledgments

The Zend Framework team thanks the following for identifying the issues and
working with us to help protect its users:

- Pádraic Brady for identifying and reporting the issue, as well as providing a
  patch to resolve the issue
- Enrico Zimuel for collaborating on and reviewing the solution
