---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2010-01: Potential XSS vectors due to inconsistent encodings"
date: 2010-01-11
---

# ZF2010-01: Potential XSS vectors due to inconsistent encodings

## Executive Summary

A number of classes, primarily within the `Zend_Form`, `Zend_Filter`,
`Zend_Form`, `Zend_Log` and `Zend_View` components, contained character encoding
inconsistencies whereby calls to the `htmlspecialchars()` and `htmlentities()`
functions used undefined or hard coded charset parameters. In many of these
cases developers were unable to set a character encoding of their choice. These
inconsistencies could, in specific circumstances, allow certain multibyte
representations of special HTML characters pass through unescaped leaving
applications potentially vulnerable to cross-site scripting (XSS) exploits. Such
exploits would only be possible if a developer used a non-typical character
encoding (such as UTF-7), allowed users to define the character encoding, or
served HTML documents without a valid character set defined.

## Action Taken

The afore-mentioned classes have been reworked to use a default character
encoding of UTF-8 and now expose methods to allow developers set a custom
character encoding.

In addition, a decision was made to default to UTF-8 for the internal encoding
mechanisms used by `Zend_View`. If you were relying on `Zend_View` using
ISO-8859-1 encoding previously, you may need to specify that encoding manually
now. You may do so in several ways:

- If manually instantiating `Zend_View`:

  ```php
  $view = new Zend_View(array('encoding' => 'ISO-8859-1'));
  // or:
  $view->setEncoding('ISO-8859-1');
  ```

- From your `application.ini`:

  ```ini
  resources.view.encoding = "ISO-8859-1"
  ```

## Recommendations

First, we recommend using UTF-8 or ensuring your chosen character encoding is
used consistently across all components to help prevent potential multibyte
based XSS attacks against your application. We also recommend that developers
ensure HTML documents are served with a valid character set defined, such as via
the Content-Type header or inside the document itself.

Second, if you are using any of the `Zend_Form`, `Zend_Filter`, `Zend_Form`,
`Zend_Log` or `Zend_View` components, we strongly recommend upgrading to Zend
Framework 1.9.7 or above; regardless, it is always best to run the most current
version of the framework.

## Other Information

### Acknowledgments

The Zend Framework team thanks the following for working with us to help protect
its users:

- Pádraic Brady, who made the initial report and who worked with our team to
  ensure that the appropriate actions were taken
