---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2009-01: LFI vector in Zend_View::setScriptPath() and render()"
date: 2009-02-17
---

# ZF2009-01: LFI vector in Zend\_View::setScriptPath() and render()

## Executive Summary

`Zend_View` is a component that utilizes PHP as a templating language. To
utilize it, you specify "script paths" that contain view scripts, and then
`render()` view scripts by specifying subdirectories within those script paths;
the output is then returned as a string value which may be cached or directly
output.

`Zend_View::setScriptPath()` in versions up to and including 1.7.4 include a
potential Local File Inclusion vulnerability. If untrusted input is used to
specify the script path and/or view script itself, a malicious attacker could
potentially specify a system directory and thus render a system file.

As an example, if the user-supplied string `/etc/passwd` or a relative path that
resolved to that file, was supplied to `Zend_View::render()`, that file would be
rendered.

## Action Taken

The functionality was patched starting in Zend Framework 1.7.5. From that
release forward, the `render()` method checks for absolute paths and/or parent
directory traversal in the file location passed, and throws an exception when
detected.

However, to provide backwards compatibility for those who relied on the
functionality, an additional flag was added which can be used to optionally
disable the protection: the method `setLfiProtection(false)`, or the constructor
option `lfiProtection`.

## Recommendations

If you were passing user input directly to `render()`, you should immediately
upgrade to Zend Framework 1.7.5 or above; regardless, it is always best to run
the most current version of the framework.

Additionally, the Zend Framework team reminds developers never to trust user
input; in particular, when using it to determine file system paths, appropriate
filters and normalization should be performed to limit the directory trees in
which a requested file may be located.

## Other Information

### Acknowledgments

The Zend Framework team thanks the following for working with us to help protect
its users:

- Grzegorz Nowicki, who made the initial report
