---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2013-03: Potential SQL injection due to execution of platform-specific SQL containing interpolations"
date: 2013-03-14
---

ZF2013-03: Potential SQL injection due to execution of platform-specific SQL containing interpolations
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 The `Zend\Db` component in Zend Framework 2 provides platform abstraction, which is used in particular for SQL abstraction. Two methods defined in the platform interface, `quoteValue()` and `quoteValueList()`, allow users to manually quote values for creating SQL statements; these are in turn consumed by aspects of the SQL abstraction platform, including `Zend\Db\Sql\Sql::getSqlStringForSqlObject()`, and the `getSqlString()` method provided in a number of classes in the `Zend\Db\Sql` namespace.

 While these methods are primarily intended for debugging and logging purposes, developers can use them to produce SQL that is then passed to the driver to execute. Due to a flaw in how the `quoteValue()` and `quoteValueList()` methods were written, this can lead to potential SQL injection.

 The offending code is located in any of the `Zend\Db\Adapter\Platform*` objects, particularly the `quoteValue()` and `quoteValueList()` methods. These methods did not take into account most of the possible escapable characters that would need to be escaped when attempting to create a quoted value for interpolation into a SQL string. Moreover, these methods did value quoting without extension level coordination which, when available, takes character-sets into account when quoting.

### Action Taken

 We have made the following changes to the Platform objects:

- Platform objects now accept the Driver as an optional parameter. This allows `quoteValue()` to use the driver level quoting/escaping mechanism to provide an "as safe as possible" value.
- If a driver level quoting/escaping function is not available, the Platform object will throw an `E_USER_NOTICE`.
- A new API was introduced for the use cases that need quoting without the possibility of a warning being triggered: `Zend\Db\Adapter\Platform\PlatformInterface::quoteTrustedValue()`.

### Recommendations

 You are only affected by this as an issue if you directly consume one of the following API's in your code, **and** execute the results with your database adapter:

- `Zend\Db\Adapter\Platform*::quoteValue()`
- `Zend\Db\Adapter\Platform*::quoteValueList()`
- `Zend\Db\Sql\Sql->getSqlStringForSqlObject()`
- `Zend\Db\Sql\Select->getSqlString()`
- `Zend\Db\Sql\Insert->getSqlString()`
- `Zend\Db\Sql\Update->getSqlString()`
- `Zend\Db\Sql\Delete->getSqlString()`

 ZF2's `Zend\Db` and other components that utilize `Zend\Db` never directly rely on interpolation of values into SQL strings. This means that unless you find any of the above calls in your code, or any code that effectively calls `quoteValue()`, this issue does not affect you.

 If you do, however, we recommend immediately upgrading to either version 2.0.8 or 2.1.4.

 While this advice can be found in many places, it is always worth repeating: you should never rely on interpolation of values into SQL strings; always use prepared statements / parameterization / extension specific value binding.

Other Information
-----------------

### Acknowledgments

 The Zend Framework team thanks the following for identifying the issues and working with us to help protect its users:

- Axel Helmert for alerting us to the issue
- Ralph Schindler for implementing a solution
 
 