---
layout: advisory
title: "ZF2010-07: Potential Security Issues in Bundled Dojo Library"
date: 2010-04-02
---

# ZF2010-07: Potential Security Issues in Bundled Dojo Library

## Executive Summary

In mid-March, 2010, the Dojo Foundation issued a Security Advisory indicating
potential security issues with specific files in Dojo Toolkit. Details of the
advisory may be found on the Dojo website:

- [http://dojotoolkit.org/blog/post/dylan/2010/03/dojo-security-advisory/](http://dojotoolkit.org/blog/post/dylan/2010/03/dojo-security-advisory/)

In particular, several files in the Dojo tree were identified as having
potential exploits, and the Dojo team also advised disabling or removing any PHP
scripts in the tree when deploying to production.

## Action Taken

Since the files in question have been patched on the Dojo release branches, the
only action needed was a new release that contains a new build of Dojo based on
the current release branch. In addition, code was added to the Zend Framework
Dojo build script to strip out all PHP files as an extra precaution.

## Recommendations

This particular vulnerability only affects those users who:

- Use Dojo, and more specifically,
- Use the Dojo build supplied by Zend Framework, or
- Have not updated their site already based on the recommendations of the recent
  announcement by the Dojo Foundation.

If you fall into one of these categories, we strongly recommend upgrading to the
latest available Zend Framework release, or one of the following releases,
immediately, and redeploying Dojo from the Dojo packages supplied with Zend
Framework:

- 1.10.3
- 1.9.8

Alternately, upgrade from official Dojo packages, following the guidelines in
the aforementioned advisory from the Dojo Foundation.

## Other Information

### Acknowledgments

The Zend Framework team thanks the following for working with us to help protect
its users:

- Paul Verhoeven, for alerting us to the original Dojo advisory.
- Peter Higgins and James Burke, from the Dojo Toolkit team, for advice on how
  best to package Zend Framework's Dojo distribution.
