---
layout: changelog
title: Changelog ver. 2.0.0rc6
date: 2012-08-29
---

Zend Framework 2.0.0rc6

This is the sixth release candidate for 2.0.0. At this time, we anticipate that
this will be the final release candidate before issuing a stable release.
We highly recommend testing your production applications against it.

29 August 2012

- Zend\Config
  - The INI adapter now allows bracket notation for appending values to an array
    within INI definitions.
- Zend\Db
  - ResultInterface adds isBuffered() method for checking if the resultset is
    buffered or not. Allows for more fine grained control of result set
    buffering, including using the database engine's native buffering.
  - Insertions with multi-part keys now work properly.
  - Expression objects may now be passed to the order() method of a Select
    object.
- Zend\Form
  - You can now omit error messages on elements when rendering via formRow(), by
    passing a boolean false as the third argument of the helper.
  - You can now use concrete hydrator instances with the factory.
  - You may now set the CSRF validator class and/or options to use on the Csrf
    element
  - The Select, Radio, and MultiCheckbox elements and view helpers were
    refactored to move value options into properties, instead of attributes.
    This makes them more consistent with other elements, and simplifies the
    interfaces.
  - Forms now lazy-load an input filter if none has been specified; this should
    simplify usage for many, and remove the "no input filter attached"
    exception.
  - All form helpers for buttons (button, submit, reset) now allow translation.
  - The formRow() view helper now allows you to set the CSS class used to
    designate an input with errors.
- Zend\Http
  - Some browser/web server combingations set SERVER_NAME to the IPv6 address,
    and enclose it in brackets. The PhpEnvironment\Request object now correctly
    detects such situations.
  - The Socket client will only fallback to SSLv3 if the ssltransport
    configuration key is not set (instead of also allowing SSLv2).
- Zend\I18n\Translator
  - Loader\LoaderInterface was splitted into Loader\FileLoaderInterface and
    Loader\RemoteLoaderInterface. The latter one will be used in ZF 2.1 for
    a database loader.
  - Translator::addTranslationPattern() and the option "translation_patterns"
    were renamed to Translator::addTranslationFilePattern and
    "translation_file_patterns".
  - A new method Translator::addRemoteTranslations() was added.
- Zend\Mvc
  - Application no longer defines the "application" identifier for its composed
    EventManager instance. If you had listeners listening on that context,
    update them to use "Zend\Mvc\Application". See this thread for more details:

      http://zend-framework-community.634137.n4.nabble.com/Change-to-Zend-Mvc-Application-s-event-identifiers-tp4656517.html

  - The redirect plugin's toRoute() method signature is now synced with that of
    the url plugin's fromRoute() method.
  - The PRG plugin now allows passing no arguments; if you do so, the currently
    matched route will be used for the redirect.
- Zend\Paginator
  - Removes the factory() and related methods. This was done to be more
    consistent with other components, and also because the utility was not
    terribly useful; in most cases, developers needed to configure the adapter
    up-front anyways.
- Zend\Stdlib
  - ClassMethods Hydrator now supports boolean getters prefixed with "is".
- Zend\Validator
  - DB validators no longer mix positional and named parameters.

More than 30 pull requests for a variety of features and bugfixes were handled
since RC5, as well as almost 20 documentation changes!