---
layout: changelog
title: Changelog ver. 2.0.0rc4
date: 2012-08-17
---

Zend Framework 2.0.0rc4

This is the fourth release candidate for 2.0.0. We will be releasing RCs
on a weekly basis until we feel all critical issues are addressed. At
this time, we anticipate few API changes before the stable release, and
recommend testing your production applications against it.

17 August 2012

- Zend\Db
  - RowGateway:  delete() now works; RowGateway objects now no longer duplicates
    the content internally leading to a larger than necessary memory footprint.
  - Adapter for PDO: fixed such that all calls to rowCount() will always be an
    integer; also fixed disconnect() from unsetting property
  - Zend\Validator\Db: fixed such that TableIdentifier can be used to promote
    schema.table identifiers
  - Sql\Select: added reset() API to reset parts of a Select object, also
    includes updated constants to refer to the parts by
  - Sql\Select and others: Added subselect support in Select, In Expression and
    the processExpression() abstraction for Zend\Db\Sql
  - Metadata: fixed various incorrect keys when refering to contstraint data in
    metadata value objects
- Zend\Filter
  - StringTrim filter now properly handles unicode whitespace
- Zend\Form
  - FieldsetInterface now defines the methods allowObjectBinding() and
    allowValueBinding().
  - New interface, FieldsetPrepareAwareInterface. Collection and Fieldset both
    implement this.
    - See https://github.com/zendframework/zf2/pull/2184 for details
  - Select elements now handle options and validation more consistently with
    other multi-value elements.
- Zend\Http
  - SSL options are now propagated to all Socket Adapter subclasses
- Zend\InputFilter
  - Allows passing ValidatorChain and FilterChain instances to the factory
- Zend\Log
  - Fixed xml formatter to not display empty extra information
- Zend\Loader
  - SplAutoloader was renamed to SplAutoloaderInterface (consistency issue)
- Zend\Mvc
  - params() helper now allows fetching full parameter containers if no
    arguments are provided to its various methods (consistency issue)
- Zend\Paginator
  - The DbSelect adapter now works
- Zend\View
  - ViewModel now allows unsetting variables properly
- Security
  - Fixed issues in Zend\Dom, Zend\Soap, Zend\Feed, and Zend\XmlRpc with regards
    to the way libxml2 allows xml entity expansion from DOCTYPE entities when it
    is provided.

Around 50 pull requests for a variety of features and bugfixes were handled
since RC3, as well as almost 30 documentation changes!