---
layout: post
title: Apigility 1.0.0beta3 Released!
date: 2014-04-30
author: Matthew Weier O'Phinney
url_author: https://mwop.net/
permalink: /blog/apigility-1-0-0beta3-released.html
categories:
- blog
- apigility
- released

---

We are pleased to announce the immediate availability of Apigility 1.0.0beta3!

- <http://apigility.org/download>

This is our third -- and likely last! -- beta release of Apigility! The features in this release are mainly around stabilization.

<!--more-->

Deployment and Console
----------------------

Most of the work we've performed since beta2 was on [zf-deploy](https://github.com/zfcampus/zf-deploy), our packaging/deployment tool. We made the following changes:

- First, the tool can now be used both within an application, as well as a standalone [phar](http://php.net/phar) file. When used as a standalone phar file, you can now self update it with the `self-update` command; this will check <https://packages.zendframework.com/> for any new versions, and, if found, do an "in-place" update of the tool. (Note: the library we use that provides this functionality often emits PHP fatal errors; in practice, however, we've noticed that the process works even when such errors are reported.)
- Second, we were not happy with the argument handling we were using, nor with the strong coupling of console argument parsing logic with the logic consuming the arguments. We built a small microframework around `Zend\Console`'s `RouteMatcher` subcomponent that provides more flexibility around argument handling, and are now shipping this in the module [zf-console](https://github.com/zfcampus/zf-console).

In addition to these architectural changes, we also implemented two new features in the tool:

- You can specify a directory with the "local" configuration you want to use in the deployment package via the `--configs` argument.
- You can specify a directory containing the ZPK skeleton you wish to use when creating a ZPK (Zend Server deployment package); this directory should contain a `deployment.xml` and any scripts you will be using.

With these changes, we feel that `zf-deploy` is ready for inclusion in a stable Apigility release!

Documentation Updates
---------------------

We've received a number of documentation improvements since beta2, and added a few documents as well.

In particular:

- An error was spotted in the "HAL for RPC services" recipe that made the code unusable.
- We've documented how to use the Zend Server SDK to deploy ZPK packages.
- We've added a recipe for adding Apigility modules to an existing Zend Framework 2 application.
- We've added documentation on the new `zf-console` module.

Beta3 Updates
-------------

In addition to the deployment and console tooling, we made the following changes:

- We updated the `SendResponse` listener in `zf-api-problem` to merge in any headers set in the application response object before sending the API Problem response. This ensures that any previously set headers are also set -- solving several issues observed when using third-party modules for Cross Origin Resource Sharing (CORS), as well as HTTP authentication.
- The storage adapters we ship with `zf-oauth` now both allow you to specify configuration via a `storage_settings` key; this change allows you to specify custom tables for both the PDO and Mongo adapters.
- We've updated the "api.enable" service to ensure it works with current versions of Apigility (and no longer raises errors!).
- We no longer display a resource class in the "Source Code" tab of a service if a corresponding class does not exist (e.g., DB-Connected resource classes are virtual services).
- We've added the option to recursively delete the directory for a service to the Admin API; the Admin UI now presents a checkbox with this option.
- We've added the option to delete an entire API. By default, this only removes the API's module from application configuration; however, you have the option to recursively delete the API module as well (once again presented in the Admin UI via a checkbox).
- We now generate factories for RPC controllers and REST resource classes when creating new services. This simplifies the story for dependency injection of these classes.

Roadmap
-------

At this time, we feel Apigility has become very stable, and that we have addressed the most pressing usability issues. We anticipate issuing a stable release next week (week of 5 May 2014).

As noted in previous beta announcements, reaching stability is only the first step, however! Features such as "Doctrine-Connected", "Mongo-Connected", and "DB-Autodiscovery" REST services are already either implemented or will be soon, and we will be debuting these in a 1.1 version in the very near future.
