---
layout: post
title: Zend Framework 1.12.12 Released!
date: 2015-05-19
author: Matthew Weier O'Phinney
url_author: http://mwop.net/
permalink: /blog/zend-framework-1-12-12-released.html
categories:
- blog
- released

---

 The Zend Framework community is pleased to announce the immediate availability of:

- Zend Framework **1.12.12**

You can download Zend Framework at:

- [http://framework.zend.com/downloads/latest#ZF1](/downloads/latest#ZF1)

<!--more-->

Security Fix
------------

 This release includes a security fix for [ZF2015-04](/security/advisory/ZF2015-04), which details message splitting vulnerabilities in `Zend_Mail` and `Zend_Http`. The patch for Zend Framework 1.12 ensures that headers cannot contain incorrect sequences that could lead to the vulnerability. Additionally, several new classes were introduced:

- `Zend_Mail_Header_HeaderName`
- `Zend_Mail_Header_HeaderValue`
- `Zend_Http_Header_HeaderValue`

 Each class contains the following methods:

- `filter($value)`, which will perform a lossy filter on the value, ensuring any invalid characters are stripped.
- `isValid($value)`, which will tell you whether or not the value is valid per the specification it targets.
- `assertValid($value)`, which will raise an exception for invalid values.

 Internally, classes that work with headers utilize `assertValid()` to ensure your messages are safe.

 We strongly recommend that consumers of the `Zend_Http` and `Zend_Mail` components upgrade immediately. If you cannot, you can download the patch separately and apply it to your ZF install:

- [ZF2015-04 patch for ZF1](https://packages.zendframework.com/releases/ZendFramework-1.12.12/0001-ZF2015-04-Fix-CRLF-injections-in-HTTP-and-Mail.patch)

Fixes
-----

 Besides the security patch, two primary features were added with this release:

- [\#537](https://github.com/zendframework/zf1/pull/537) fixed a problem introduced with 1.12.11 with regards to view template resolution when the matched module, controller, or action contains special characters.
- Zend Framework 1 was audited to pass unit tests on PHP 7; this means that you should be able to run ZF1 on PHP 7 nightly builds!

 For the full list of changes, visit the changelog:

- [Changelog](/changelog/1.12.12)
