data/posts/2017-01-31-zend-paginator.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: Paginating data collections with zend-paginator
date: 2017-01-31T11:15:00-06:00
author: Enrico Zimuel
url_author: http://www.zimuel.it
permalink: /blog/2017-01-31-paginating-data-zend-paginator.html
categories:
- blog
- components
- zend-paginator

---

[Zend-paginator](https://zendframework.github.io/zend-paginator/) is a flexible
component for paginating collections of data and presenting that data to users.

[Pagination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pagination) is a standard UI solution
to manage the visualization of list of items, like a list of posts in a blog web
site or a list of products in online stores.


Zend-paginator is very popular among Zend Framework developers and it's often
used with [zend-view](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-view), thanks to
specific plugin.

It can be used also with other template engines and in this article, I will show
how to use it in general, giving an example using [Plates](http://platesphp.com/).

## Usage of zend-paginator

The component can be installed with [composer](https://getcomposer.org/), using
the following command:

```bash
composer require zendframework/zend-paginator
```

To consume the Paginator component we need to have a collection of items.
We have different adapters available:

- *ArrayAdapter*, to work with PHP array;
- *DbSelect*, to work with a SQL collection (using [zend-db](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db));
- *Iterator*, to work with any [Iterator](http://php.net/manual/en/class.iterator.php) instance.

In case we don't have a collection that is an array, a database, or an Iterator
instance we can create a custom data source adapter.

To do so, we need to implement `Zend\Paginator\Adapter\AdapterInterface`.
There are two methods required to do this:

- `count() : int`
- `getItems(int $offset, int $itemCountPerPage) : array`

We need to return the total number of items in the collection, implementing the
`count()` method, and a portion (a *page*) starting from `$offset` position with
a size of `$itemCountPerPage` per page.

With these two methods we can use zend-paginator with any type of collections.

For instance, imagine we need to paginate a collection of blog posts and we
have a Posts class that manage all the posts. We can implement an adapter
like this:

```php
require 'vendor/autoload.php';

use Zend\Paginator\Adapter\AdapterInterface;
use Zend\Paginator\Paginator;
use Zend\Paginator\ScrollingStyle\Sliding;

class Posts implements AdapterInterface {
    protected $posts = [];

    public function __construct() {
      // Read posts from file/database/whatever
    }

    public function count() {
        return count($this->posts);
    }

    public function getItems($offset, $itemCountPerPage)
    {
        return array_slice($this->posts, $offset, $itemCountPerPage);
    }
}

$posts = new Posts();
$paginator = new Paginator($posts);

Paginator::setDefaultScrollingStyle(new Sliding());
$paginator->setCurrentPageNumber(1);
$paginator->setDefaultItemCountPerPage(8);

foreach ($paginator as $post) {
  // Iterate on each post
}

$pages = $paginator->getPages();
var_dump($pages);
```

In this example we created a `Zend\Paginator\Paginator` adapter using a custom
`Posts` class. This class stores the collection of posts using a protected
array (`$posts`). This adapter can be used to create the `Paginator` object.

We need to set some configuration values for `Paginator`, the first settings is
the scrolling style. We used the [Sliding](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-paginator/blob/master/src/ScrollingStyle/Sliding.php)
style, a Yahoo!-like scrolling style that positions the current page number in
the center of the page range, or as close as possible.

![Scrolling style](/img/usage-rendering-control.png)

> Note: the `Sliding` scrolling style is the default one of `Paginator`. We need
> to set it explicitly using `Paginator::setDefaultScrollingStyle` only if we
> do not use [zend-servicemanager](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-servicemanager)
> as Service Locator. Otherwise, the scrolling style is loaded by default from
> the Service Manager.

The other two configuration values are the current page number and the number of
items per page. In the example we started from page 1 and we count 8 items per
page.

We can then iterate on the `$paginator` object to retrieve the post of the
current page in the collection.

At the end, we can retrieve the information regarding the previous page, the
next page, the total items in the collection, and more. To get these values
we need to call the `getPages()` method. We will obtain an object like this:

```php
object(stdClass)#81 (13) {
  ["pageCount"]=>
  int(3)
  ["itemCountPerPage"]=>
  int(8)
  ["first"]=>
  int(1)
  ["current"]=>
  int(1)
  ["last"]=>
  int(3)
  ["next"]=>
  int(2)
  ["pagesInRange"]=>
  array(3) {
    [1]=>
    int(1)
    [2]=>
    int(2)
    [3]=>
    int(3)
  }
  ["firstPageInRange"]=>
  int(1)
  ["lastPageInRange"]=>
  int(3)
  ["currentItemCount"]=>
  int(8)
  ["totalItemCount"]=>
  int(19)
  ["firstItemNumber"]=>
  int(1)
  ["lastItemNumber"]=>
  int(8)
}
```

Using this information, we can easily build an HTML footer for navigate across
the collection.

> Note: using zend-view we can easily consume the [paginationControl](http://zendframework.github.io/zend-paginator/usage/#rendering-pages-with-view-scripts)
> helper that provides a navigation bar for the paginator using a single
> function.

In the next section I show an example using the [Plates](http://platesphp.com/)
template engine.

## An example using Plates

Plates is a native PHP template, fast and easy to use, without any additional
meta language, just PHP.

In our example, we will create a Plates template to paginate a collection of
data using zend-paginator. We will use [bootstrap](http://getbootstrap.com/) as
UI framework.

We suppose to manage the pagination of the blog posts using the following URL:

```
/blog[/page/{page:\d+}]
```

where `[/page/{page:\d+}]` represents the optional page number (using the regexp
  `\d+` to validate only digits). If we open the `/blog` URL we will get the
first page of the collection. To return the second page we need to connect to
`/blog/page/2`, third page to `/blog/page/3`, and so on.

For instance, we can manage the page parameter using a PSR-7 middleware class
consuming the previous `Posts` adapter, that works as follow:

```php
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface;
use League\Plates\Engine;
use Zend\Paginator\Paginator;
use Posts;

class PaginatorMiddleware
{
    /** @var Posts */
    protected $posts;
    /** @var Engine */
    protected $template;

    public function __construct(Posts $post, Engine $template = null)
    {
        $this->posts    = $post;
        $this->template = $template;
    }

    public function __invoke(ServerRequestInterface $request,
      ResponseInterface $response, callable $next = null)
    {
        $paginator = new Paginator($this->posts);
        $page = $request->getAttribute('page') ?? 1;

        Paginator::setDefaultScrollingStyle(new Sliding());
        $paginator->setCurrentPageNumber($page);
        $paginator->setDefaultItemCountPerPage(8);

        $pages = $paginator->getPages();
        $response->getBody()->write(
            $this->template->render('posts', [
                'paginator' => $paginator,
                'pages' => $pages
            ])
        );
        return $response;
    }
}
```

We used a `posts.php` template, passing the paginator (`$paginator`) and
the pages (`$pages`) objects. This template should contain a code like this:

```php
<?php $this->layout('template', ['title' => 'Blog Posts']) ?>

<div class="container">
  <h1>Blog Posts</h1>

  <?php foreach ($paginator as $post): ?>
    <div class="row">
      <?php // prints the post title, date, author, ... ?>
    </div>
  <?php endforeach; ?>

  <?php $this->insert('page-navigation', ['pages' => $pages]) ?>
</div>
```

The `page-navigation.php` template contains the HTML code for the page
navigation control, with button like previous, next, and page numbers.

```php
<nav aria-label="Page navigation">
  <ul class="pagination">
    <?php if (!isset($pages->previous)): ?>
      <li class="disabled"><a href="#" aria-label="Previous"><span aria-hidden="true">&laquo;</span></a></li>
    <?php else: ?>
      <li><a href="/blog/page/<?php echo $pages->previous ?>" aria-label="Previous"><span aria-hidden="true">&laquo;</span></a></li>
    <?php endif; ?>

    <?php foreach ($pages->pagesInRange as $num): ?>
      <?php if ($num === $pages->current): ?>
        <li class="active"><a href="/blog/page/<?php echo $num ?>"><?php echo $num ?> <span class="sr-only">(current)</span></a></li>
      <?php else: ?>
        <li><a href="/blog/page/<?php echo $num ?>"><?php echo $num ?></a></li>
      <?php endif; ?>
    <?php endforeach; ?>

    <?php if (!isset($pages->next)): ?>
      <li class="disabled"><a href="#" aria-label="Next"><span aria-hidden="true">&raquo;</span></a></li>
    <?php else: ?>
      <li><a href="/blog/page/<?php echo $pages->next ?>" aria-label="Next"><span aria-hidden="true">&raquo;</span></a></li>
    <?php endif; ?>
  </ul>
</nav>
```

## Summary

The zend-paginator component of Zend Framework is a powerful and easy to use
package that provides pagination of data. It can be used as standalone component
in many PHP projects using different frameworks and template engine. In this
article, I showed how to use it in general purpose applications.
Moreover, I showed an example using Plates and bootstrap, in a PSR-7 middleware
scenario.

Visit the [zend-paginator documentation](https://docs.zendframework.com/zend-paginator/)
to find out what else you might be able to do with this component!

Commit message:

Added the Plates installation note in blog post

data/posts/2017-01-31-zend-paginator.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: Paginating data collections with zend-paginator
date: 2017-01-31T11:15:00-06:00
author: Enrico Zimuel
url_author: http://www.zimuel.it
permalink: /blog/2017-01-31-paginating-data-zend-paginator.html
categories:
- blog
- components
- zend-paginator

---

[Zend-paginator](https://zendframework.github.io/zend-paginator/) is a flexible
component for paginating collections of data and presenting that data to users.

[Pagination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pagination) is a standard UI solution
to manage the visualization of list of items, like a list of posts in a blog web
site or a list of products in online stores.


Zend-paginator is very popular among Zend Framework developers and it's often
used with [zend-view](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-view), thanks to
specific plugin.

It can be used also with other template engines and in this article, I will show
how to use it in general, giving an example using [Plates](http://platesphp.com/).

## Usage of zend-paginator

The component can be installed with [composer](https://getcomposer.org/), using
the following command:

```bash
composer require zendframework/zend-paginator
```

To consume the Paginator component we need to have a collection of items.
We have different adapters available:

- *ArrayAdapter*, to work with PHP array;
- *DbSelect*, to work with a SQL collection (using [zend-db](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db));
- *Iterator*, to work with any [Iterator](http://php.net/manual/en/class.iterator.php) instance.

In case we don't have a collection that is an array, a database, or an Iterator
instance we can create a custom data source adapter.

To do so, we need to implement `Zend\Paginator\Adapter\AdapterInterface`.
There are two methods required to do this:

- `count() : int`
- `getItems(int $offset, int $itemCountPerPage) : array`

We need to return the total number of items in the collection, implementing the
`count()` method, and a portion (a *page*) starting from `$offset` position with
a size of `$itemCountPerPage` per page.

With these two methods we can use zend-paginator with any type of collections.

For instance, imagine we need to paginate a collection of blog posts and we
have a Posts class that manage all the posts. We can implement an adapter
like this:

```php
require 'vendor/autoload.php';

use Zend\Paginator\Adapter\AdapterInterface;
use Zend\Paginator\Paginator;
use Zend\Paginator\ScrollingStyle\Sliding;

class Posts implements AdapterInterface {
    protected $posts = [];

    public function __construct() {
      // Read posts from file/database/whatever
    }

    public function count() {
        return count($this->posts);
    }

    public function getItems($offset, $itemCountPerPage)
    {
        return array_slice($this->posts, $offset, $itemCountPerPage);
    }
}

$posts = new Posts();
$paginator = new Paginator($posts);

Paginator::setDefaultScrollingStyle(new Sliding());
$paginator->setCurrentPageNumber(1);
$paginator->setDefaultItemCountPerPage(8);

foreach ($paginator as $post) {
  // Iterate on each post
}

$pages = $paginator->getPages();
var_dump($pages);
```

In this example we created a `Zend\Paginator\Paginator` adapter using a custom
`Posts` class. This class stores the collection of posts using a protected
array (`$posts`). This adapter can be used to create the `Paginator` object.

We need to set some configuration values for `Paginator`, the first settings is
the scrolling style. We used the [Sliding](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-paginator/blob/master/src/ScrollingStyle/Sliding.php)
style, a Yahoo!-like scrolling style that positions the current page number in
the center of the page range, or as close as possible.

![Scrolling style](/img/usage-rendering-control.png)

> Note: the `Sliding` scrolling style is the default one of `Paginator`. We need
> to set it explicitly using `Paginator::setDefaultScrollingStyle` only if we
> do not use [zend-servicemanager](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-servicemanager)
> as Service Locator. Otherwise, the scrolling style is loaded by default from
> the Service Manager.

The other two configuration values are the current page number and the number of
items per page. In the example we started from page 1 and we count 8 items per
page.

We can then iterate on the `$paginator` object to retrieve the post of the
current page in the collection.

At the end, we can retrieve the information regarding the previous page, the
next page, the total items in the collection, and more. To get these values
we need to call the `getPages()` method. We will obtain an object like this:

```php
object(stdClass)#81 (13) {
  ["pageCount"]=>
  int(3)
  ["itemCountPerPage"]=>
  int(8)
  ["first"]=>
  int(1)
  ["current"]=>
  int(1)
  ["last"]=>
  int(3)
  ["next"]=>
  int(2)
  ["pagesInRange"]=>
  array(3) {
    [1]=>
    int(1)
    [2]=>
    int(2)
    [3]=>
    int(3)
  }
  ["firstPageInRange"]=>
  int(1)
  ["lastPageInRange"]=>
  int(3)
  ["currentItemCount"]=>
  int(8)
  ["totalItemCount"]=>
  int(19)
  ["firstItemNumber"]=>
  int(1)
  ["lastItemNumber"]=>
  int(8)
}
```

Using this information, we can easily build an HTML footer for navigate across
the collection.

> Note: using zend-view we can easily consume the [paginationControl](http://zendframework.github.io/zend-paginator/usage/#rendering-pages-with-view-scripts)
> helper that provides a navigation bar for the paginator using a single
> function.

In the next section I show an example using the [Plates](http://platesphp.com/)
template engine.

## An example using Plates

Plates is a native PHP template, fast and easy to use, without any additional
meta language, just PHP. It can be installed using composer, with the following
command:

```bash
composer require league/plates
```

In our example, we will create a Plates template to paginate a collection of
data using zend-paginator. We will use [bootstrap](http://getbootstrap.com/) as
UI framework.

We suppose to manage the pagination of the blog posts using the following URL:

```
/blog[/page/{page:\d+}]
```

where `[/page/{page:\d+}]` represents the optional page number (using the regexp
  `\d+` to validate only digits). If we open the `/blog` URL we will get the
first page of the collection. To return the second page we need to connect to
`/blog/page/2`, third page to `/blog/page/3`, and so on.

For instance, we can manage the page parameter using a PSR-7 middleware class
consuming the previous `Posts` adapter, that works as follow:

```php
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface;
use League\Plates\Engine;
use Zend\Paginator\Paginator;
use Posts;

class PaginatorMiddleware
{
    /** @var Posts */
    protected $posts;
    /** @var Engine */
    protected $template;

    public function __construct(Posts $post, Engine $template = null)
    {
        $this->posts    = $post;
        $this->template = $template;
    }

    public function __invoke(ServerRequestInterface $request,
      ResponseInterface $response, callable $next = null)
    {
        $paginator = new Paginator($this->posts);
        $page = $request->getAttribute('page') ?? 1;

        Paginator::setDefaultScrollingStyle(new Sliding());
        $paginator->setCurrentPageNumber($page);
        $paginator->setDefaultItemCountPerPage(8);

        $pages = $paginator->getPages();
        $response->getBody()->write(
            $this->template->render('posts', [
                'paginator' => $paginator,
                'pages' => $pages
            ])
        );
        return $response;
    }
}
```

We used a `posts.php` template, passing the paginator (`$paginator`) and
the pages (`$pages`) objects. This template should contain a code like this:

```php
<?php $this->layout('template', ['title' => 'Blog Posts']) ?>

<div class="container">
  <h1>Blog Posts</h1>

  <?php foreach ($paginator as $post): ?>
    <div class="row">
      <?php // prints the post title, date, author, ... ?>
    </div>
  <?php endforeach; ?>

  <?php $this->insert('page-navigation', ['pages' => $pages]) ?>
</div>
```

The `page-navigation.php` template contains the HTML code for the page
navigation control, with button like previous, next, and page numbers.

```php
<nav aria-label="Page navigation">
  <ul class="pagination">
    <?php if (!isset($pages->previous)): ?>
      <li class="disabled"><a href="#" aria-label="Previous"><span aria-hidden="true">&laquo;</span></a></li>
    <?php else: ?>
      <li><a href="/blog/page/<?php echo $pages->previous ?>" aria-label="Previous"><span aria-hidden="true">&laquo;</span></a></li>
    <?php endif; ?>

    <?php foreach ($pages->pagesInRange as $num): ?>
      <?php if ($num === $pages->current): ?>
        <li class="active"><a href="/blog/page/<?php echo $num ?>"><?php echo $num ?> <span class="sr-only">(current)</span></a></li>
      <?php else: ?>
        <li><a href="/blog/page/<?php echo $num ?>"><?php echo $num ?></a></li>
      <?php endif; ?>
    <?php endforeach; ?>

    <?php if (!isset($pages->next)): ?>
      <li class="disabled"><a href="#" aria-label="Next"><span aria-hidden="true">&raquo;</span></a></li>
    <?php else: ?>
      <li><a href="/blog/page/<?php echo $pages->next ?>" aria-label="Next"><span aria-hidden="true">&raquo;</span></a></li>
    <?php endif; ?>
  </ul>
</nav>
```

## Summary

The zend-paginator component of Zend Framework is a powerful and easy to use
package that provides pagination of data. It can be used as standalone component
in many PHP projects using different frameworks and template engine. In this
article, I showed how to use it in general purpose applications.
Moreover, I showed an example using Plates and bootstrap, in a PSR-7 middleware
scenario.

Visit the [zend-paginator documentation](https://docs.zendframework.com/zend-paginator/)
to find out what else you might be able to do with this component!
