data/posts/2017-12-06-zend-db-2.9.0.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: A new release of zend-db
date: 2017-12-06T11:02:00-05:00
author: Enrico Zimuel
url_author: https://www.zimuel.it
permalink: /blog/2017-12-06-zend-db-2.9.0.html
categories:
- blog
- zend-db
- database

---

Today, we released [zend-db 2.9.0](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/releases/tag/release-2.9.0)!
This release come after more than 1 year from the previous [2.8.2](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/releases/tag/release-2.8.2)
and it contains 7 bug fixes, 6 new features, unit test and documentation
improvements.

**Zend-db** is an important component of many PHP projects and we know that its
support is crucial for many people. We spent a lot of time to fix the reported
issues and review all the PRs (more than 50).

## Zend-db 2.9.0

This release contains the following changes:

### Added

- [#216](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/216) added AFTER support
  in ALTER TABLE syntax for MySQL
- [#223](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/223) added support for
  empty values set with IN predicate
- [#271](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/271) added support for
  dash character on MySQL identifier
- [#273](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/273) added support for
  implementing an error handler for db2_prepare
- [#275](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/275) added support for
  LIMIT OFFSET for db2
- [#280](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/280) added version dsn
  parameter for pdo_dblib

### Fixed

- [#205](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/205) fixes the spaces in
  ORDER BY syntax
- [#224](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/224) fixes how parameters
  are bound to statements in the PDO adapter. PDO has a restriction on parameter
  names of `[0-9a-zA_Z_]`; as such, the driver now hashes the parameter names
  using `md5()` in order to ensure compatibility with other drivers.
- [#229](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/229) fixes the support
  of SSL for mysqli
- [#255](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/255) fixes ResultSet with
  array values
- [#261](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/261) fixes Exception in
  Firebird driver doesn't support lastInsertId
- [#276](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/276) fixes the support
  of PHP 7.2
- [#287](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/287) fixes the usage of
  count() with PHP 7.2

## Future of zend-db

We are planning **zend-db 3.0.0** release for next year. This new major version
will contains some cool new features like an extended [DDL support](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/231)
for different db vendors (right now is more MySQL oriented) the support of [SEQUENCE](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/sequence-numbers/sequence-numbers)
more bug fixes and some minor BC changes.

If you want to contribute to zend-db, you are more than welcome! For more
information you can read the [contribution guide](https://framework.zend.com/participate/contributor-guide)
of the Zend Framework project.

## Special thanks

A special thanks to our contributors [Anaël Ollier](https://github.com/nanawel),
[W.R. Guzmán](https://github.com/WellingGuzman), [Rob Allen](https://github.com/akrabat),
[Václav Vaník](https://github.com/vaclavvanik), [Sasha Alex Romanenko](https://github.com/alextech),
[Zdenek Machek](https://github.com/machek), [Bart McLeod](https://github.com/bartmcleod),
[Cyrille Grandval](https://github.com/cgrandval), [Remi Collet](https://github.com/remicollet),
[Michał Bundyra](https://github.com/webimpress) and our review team for this new
release of zend-db.

We don't know if this will be the last post for this year, **Merry Christmas and
Happy new Year from the Zend Framework Team!**

Commit message:

Added the PHP 5.5 drop and support of PHP 7.1+ for next major

data/posts/2017-12-06-zend-db-2.9.0.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: A new release of zend-db
date: 2017-12-06T11:02:00-05:00
author: Enrico Zimuel
url_author: https://www.zimuel.it
permalink: /blog/2017-12-06-zend-db-2.9.0.html
categories:
- blog
- zend-db
- database

---

Today, we released [zend-db 2.9.0](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/releases/tag/release-2.9.0)!
This release come after more than 1 year from the previous [2.8.2](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/releases/tag/release-2.8.2)
and it contains 7 bug fixes, 6 new features, unit test and documentation
improvements.

**Zend-db** is an important component of many PHP projects and we know that its
support is crucial for many people. We spent a lot of time to fix the reported
issues and review all the PRs (more than 50).

## Zend-db 2.9.0

This release contains the following changes:

### Added

- [#216](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/216) added AFTER support
  in ALTER TABLE syntax for MySQL
- [#223](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/223) added support for
  empty values set with IN predicate
- [#271](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/271) added support for
  dash character on MySQL identifier
- [#273](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/273) added support for
  implementing an error handler for db2_prepare
- [#275](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/275) added support for
  LIMIT OFFSET for db2
- [#280](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/280) added version dsn
  parameter for pdo_dblib

### Fixed

- [#205](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/205) fixes the spaces in
  ORDER BY syntax
- [#224](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/224) fixes how parameters
  are bound to statements in the PDO adapter. PDO has a restriction on parameter
  names of `[0-9a-zA_Z_]`; as such, the driver now hashes the parameter names
  using `md5()` in order to ensure compatibility with other drivers.
- [#229](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/229) fixes the support
  of SSL for mysqli
- [#255](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/255) fixes ResultSet with
  array values
- [#261](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/261) fixes Exception in
  Firebird driver doesn't support lastInsertId
- [#276](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/276) fixes the support
  of PHP 7.2
- [#287](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/287) fixes the usage of
  count() with PHP 7.2

We also dropped the support of PHP 5.5 (EOL last year), now we are supporting
PHP 5.6+.

## Future of zend-db

We are planning **zend-db 3.0.0** release for next year. This new major version
will contains some cool new features like an extended [DDL support](https://github.com/zendframework/zend-db/pull/231)
for different db vendors (right now is more MySQL oriented) the support of [SEQUENCE](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/sequence-numbers/sequence-numbers)
more bug fixes and some BC changes, like the support of PHP 7.1+.

If you want to contribute to zend-db, you are more than welcome! For more
information you can read the [contribution guide](https://framework.zend.com/participate/contributor-guide)
of the Zend Framework project.

## Special thanks

A special thanks to our contributors [Anaël Ollier](https://github.com/nanawel),
[W.R. Guzmán](https://github.com/WellingGuzman), [Rob Allen](https://github.com/akrabat),
[Václav Vaník](https://github.com/vaclavvanik), [Sasha Alex Romanenko](https://github.com/alextech),
[Zdenek Machek](https://github.com/machek), [Bart McLeod](https://github.com/bartmcleod),
[Cyrille Grandval](https://github.com/cgrandval), [Remi Collet](https://github.com/remicollet),
[Michał Bundyra](https://github.com/webimpress) and our review team for this new
release of zend-db.

We don't know if this will be the last post for this year, **Merry Christmas and
Happy new Year from the Zend Framework Team!**
